political analyst uh you're joining us
from uh Paris uh Marwan it's good to
it's good to talk to you on this and um
there's a there's a big gray area there
are a lot of questions around this we
have very little certainty and it kind
of feels like we've been here before but
there's so much movement around this
today it it feels like it could be
something there could be real
movement well I know you being a
journalist and we being a News Network
clearly you're are not taking uh general
gant's advice about just calming down
sitting it uh quietly until we hear
exactly what is going to transpire out
of Cairo because as a news media we try
to get ahead of uh ahead of the current
as it were and clearly there are a lot
of expectations you know one of the
things we've learned uh in a long
experience in media and Academia is that
when there are leaks one has to look who
behind the leak and why they are leaking
it so those who are leaking all the
optimism are certainly leading uh a sort
of a strategy by optimism meaning you
continue to push towards that there's
good news coming the ceasefire is
eminent and then if you are the United
States and Israel you would say well
Hamas is to be at fault for finally you
know breaking it word or or or walking
back it's what its promises and so on so
forth on the other hand if there is
really a serious momentum and that's why
different countries are sending their
technical teams to Cairo because now
it's just a question of details and and
getting those out of the way in order to
finalize the deal then we could be onto
something now how and how did we get
there if in fact Netanyahu continues to
say that he will be attacking uh RAF
come what may Deal or No Deal something
that is an an atha to Hamas that will
never accept and what is of hamas's
basic principled if you will demands
that Israel would draw its forces
eventually from Gaza or uh that the
population of Gaza will be able to go
back to its homes or uh that uh there
will be some serious reconstruction and
so on so forth now briefly I would say
the following it seems that the ball has
moved from Hamas and Israel to Israel
and the United States if the United
States has given Hamas
guarantees on all of these issues that
means the clash of the wills is going to
be between Biden and Nan forward because
if the Biden Administration gives the
Palestinians the Egyptians and the cies
guarantees that they do guarantee that
Israel will do one 12 three then it's
going to be up to Washington to make
sure that those guarantees are respected
and it seems what if you hear earlier in
the newsour from the Hamas spokesperson
that this could in fact be enough for
Hamas yeah it's interesting because
Hamas spoke to alaz I'm looking at the
clock about five and a half hours ago
now right that's the latest update that
we got directly from a Hamas
representative and they firmly in that
interview put the ball in the US's Court
cuz they said we want a US guarantee we
want no Israeli Invasion intervention of
Rafa and we're obviously not going to
take Israel's word for it but we would
take
the US's word for it that puts the US in
in in a in an interesting situation I
was going to say a bind I don't know if
it's the right
word it is a bit of an abide in the
sense that we know that Netanyahu has
been
humiliating the bid Administration like
there's no tomorrow every time uh uh the
American Administration showers the N
governments and rewards the Netanyahu
governments for its war crimes for
breaking its Promises to the United
States for refusing American advice the
record shows that moving forward
probably nyaho will continue on the same
path there's no reason why he he should
change going on that path especially
that he does have at least theoretically
speaking or declaratively speaking
Coalition partners that continue to
threaten to leave his Parliament his
Coalition if in fact he signs on a SE so
we have a situation that is fluid you
know to say the least
but at the same time here we I'll add
another dimension to all the forces that
are at work we've seen more domestic
pressure on the Biden Administration
especially from the universities and
across the cities in the United States
we've also seen more pressure
domestically in Israel including by the
likes of guns and I and c and so on so
forth for the na government to clarify
what the heck is its position moving for
so you could say there there are some
serious pressures now and that the war
did in some you know horrible ways uh
achieve its objectives in the sense of
destroying Gaza and incapacity to
destroy Hamas and there is a real
American fear and a real American
objection to the invasion of Rafa same
goes for Egypt and Jordan and Saudi
Arabia and others so we are stuck now
and hence the only way to move the ball
forward is something that I did speak
about over the past many weeks and
months is that as in every negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis it's
the United States that steps in and
gives guarantees to both sides to make
both sides happy and then it is the
United States that is responsible for
those promises now we know for example
from the oso proc Oslo process that
started in 1993 the so-call peace
process the United States did give the
Palestinian a number of guarantees but
those guarantees were not respected by
the various Bush and and and other
administrations right Clint even Clinton
administration the settlements increased
Jerusalem was basically you know
confiscated and and and recognized by
the United States as capital of Israel
and so on so forth so now Hamas decides
like the PLO to place its confidence its
trust in the United States that if the
United States gives those guarantees
that the United States will fulfill uh
its promise you know see now yeah as I
list to you Maran I'm I'm reminded of
the words of Osama hamdan which I
actually understand better listening to
you when he spoke to us five uh five
hours ago he said look we want
guarantees from the US but that's
necessary but it's not sufficient we
also want to see the details of the deal
and he stressed that point several
several times and I think you just
highlighted why uh Maran bishar aljaz
senior political editor thank you so
much for joining
us make sure to subscribe to our channel
to get the latest news from aler here